Comparing the performance of peak callers
------------------------------------------

No research on peak callers and their parameters for ATAC ata has currently
been done. We decided to test two widely used peak callers -- Macs2 (initially
designed for ChIP-Seq data) and FSeq (initially designed for DNaseI data). We
ran peak calling using each of the tools and ranging two parameters which are
expected to have a major influence on peak calling:

- length/width/shifting of the statistical model which directly influences the
  average width of peaks to be called (`-l` for FSeq; `--extsize` for Macs2)
- significance threshold which determines how different from a background noise
  the signal should be to be considered as a peak (`-t` for FSeq; `--qvalue`
  for Macs2)

We used data generated from fresh K562 cells, as we consider it gold standard,
least biased (by freezing/fixing) and most accurate, therefore a perfect
candidate for testing peak callers on.

#### Experimental design

We had three samples (`bam` files as input for Macs2 and `bed` files as input
for FSeq) of fresh K562 cells, namely `fresh1`, `fresh2`, `fresh3`, which were
technical replicates of the same sample.

We ran
[FSeq](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/jknightlab/ATACseq_pipeline/master/Core_manuscript/Fseq_Macs2_Hotspot/run_fseq.sh)
ranging the two parameters in the following way:


- `-l`: 100 200 400 600 800 1000 2000
- `-t`: 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 

We ran
[Macs2](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/jknightlab/ATACseq_pipeline/master/Core_manuscript/Fseq_Macs2_Hotspot/run_macs.sh)
ranging the two parameters in the following way:

- `--extsize`: 10 100 200 400 600 800 1000 2000 
- `--qvalue`: 0.001 0.005 0.01 0.05 0.1 0.5 


#### Choice of best parameters per peak caller

Choosing best parameters per peak caller turned out to be very complicated. We
looked at things like sensitivity, specificity, F-Score, distribution of called
peaks across annotated categories (TSS, enhancer regions, repressed regions,
etc). The problem with all those metrics is that when we increase the
width/length parameter, peak callers tend to call wider peaks, often join
narrow adjacent peaks. When we have wider window (2000 bases compared to 100),
we will most probably call more "true" events (annotated peaks), simply because
the covered area is so wide. This means that we ideally want maximum number of
"true" (annotated as TSS/Enh/etc) peaks using the minimal number of bases. So
the metric that we took as final to choose the best parameter set per peak
caller is the following:

```
Performance = PEon * ( BPon/BPtot ),

- PEon -- number of peaks mapped on target (to areas annotated as TSS/Enh/etc, "desired" areas)
- BPon -- number of bases (sum) in peaks mapped on target
- BPtot -- number of bases (sum) in all called peaks
```

This way we are accounting for the number of "true" peaks that we called, the
number of bases that we called as "true" and the total number of bases (this
account for both off-target peaks -- e.g., in repressed regions -- and peaks
called at annotated regions).

When looking at "true" peaks, we had a variety of options to compare our peaks
to:

- Encode K562 regulatory elements annotation generated by Segwey
- Encode K562 regulatory elements annotation generated by ChromM
- Duke K562 DNaseI sites

To have a most valid set, we only took peaks which were in overlap of all three
data sets (Seqwey+ChromM+DNase).

Further on, we created two peak sets:

- *on target* -- overlap of "1_active_promoter", "2_weak_promoter",
  "4_strong_enhancer", "6_weak_enhancer" from ChromM; "TSS", "Enhancer",
  "Weak_Enhancer" from Segwey; DNaseI peaks;
- *off target* -- overlap of "12_Repressed", "11_Weak_Txn",
  "10_Txn_Elondation", "9_Txn_Transition" from ChromM; "Transcribed",
  "Repressed" from Segwey; DNaseI peaks (overlap with DNaseI peaks might be
  questionable here, as DNase data should not contain those peaks; however, we
  found that after overlapping Segwey and ChromM peaks, further overlapping it
  with DNase peaks does not exclude too many extra peaks).

We required peaks to overlap for at least 25% of their length
(non-reciprocally). This is the code to generate *on target* and *off target*
peak sets:

```
cat wgEncodeAwgSegmentationCombinedK562-T.bed \
    wgEncodeAwgSegmentationCombinedK562-R.bed | \
    bedtools merge -i $i > \
    wgEncodeAwgSegmentationCombinedK562_OFFtarget.bed

bedtools intersect \
    -f 0.25 \
    -a wgEncodeAwgSegmentationCombinedK562_ONtarget.bed \
    -b wgEncodeBroadHmmK562HMM_ONtarget.bed | \
    bedtools intersect \
    -f 0.25 \
    -a wgEncodeAwgDnaseUwdukeK562UniPk.bed \
    -b - > \
    ONtarget.bed 

bedtools intersect \
    -f 0.25 \
    -a wgEncodeAwgSegmentationCombinedK562_OFFtarget.bed \
    -b wgEncodeBroadHmmK562HMM_OFFtarget.bed | \
    bedtools intersect \
    -f 0.25 \
    -a wgEncodeAwgDnaseUwdukeK562UniPk.bed \
    -b - > \
    OFFtarget.bed
```

We used the intersection of peaks called in 3 fresh ATAC K562 samples (peaks
were called intersected if they had at least 30% overlap reciprocally in all
three samples). We required the overlap of 50% of ATAC peak length with an
annotated peak.


#### Results







12918	fresh1.fseq.length_0400.tresh_10.bed
11508	fresh1.fseq.length_0800.tresh_08.bed
10321	fresh1.fseq.length_0600.tresh_08.bed
9098	fresh1.fseq.length_0400.tresh_08.bed


12682	fresh2.fseq.length_0400.tresh_08.bed
12690	fresh2.fseq.length_0200.tresh_08.bed
12841	fresh2.fseq.length_0400.tresh_10.bed
12889	fresh2.fseq.length_0200.tresh_10.bed














-------------------------------------------------
developed by Irina Pulyakhina irina@well.ox.ac.uk
