Meeting 15-Mar-2016
--------------------------------------

Present: Alicia, Anna, Julian, Irina

1) Alicia: coverage of a skin sample looks better than before but still noisy.
Why? Potential reasons: because of the cell type itself (it is not a pure cell
line); because of the nature of the sample (not blood, but skin); most probably
not chemistry.

2) Future plans: if the Core is happy to sequence a bit more, it would be
interesting to trying different transposition times for one of the primary cell
types.

3) We were planning to have three biological samples for primary cells. That
means that we can get a sample from one person and split it into three
aliquotes and sequence (option A). Or we can have three samples from three
people, one sampled per person (option B). There are pros and cons for both: it
is interesting to see the variability within three biological replicates (and
how much it differs from the variation in technical replicates); however, if we
have technical replicates for one cell type and biological replicates for
another cell type, we cannot properly compare these two cell types.

4) Irina presented her comparison of K562 frozen ATAC samples and DNase samples
(from Encode, bam files analyzed with Pinechrom) which can be found here:

https://github.com/jknightlab/ATACseq_pipeline/blob/master/Core_manuscript/DNase/dnase_atac.md

Action points:

- follow up analysis of distribution of sizes of unique peaks in DNase/ATAC (Irina)
- downsampling frozen ATAC to the size of fresh ATAC library to see the
  influence of downsampling on the strength/purity of the signal (Irina)

---
designed by I. Pulyakhina
